---
layout: post
title:  "Times Tables"
---

An envelope is a curve created by a series of tangent lines. Some fascinating curves can be created by tracing tangent lines as chords on a circle, using the rules of multiplication in modular arithmetic.

In modular arithmetic, operations are done on a circle instead of a number line. Some {% katex %}n{% endkatex %} points can be wrapped evenly around in a circle, and then a chord can be drawn between any two points, if the points are related under multiplication by {% katex %}x{% endkatex %}.

The demonstration below starts with a modulus of {% katex %}200{% endkatex %}, representing the number of points around the circle, and a multiplier of {% katex %}2{% endkatex %}, representing the multiplier used to draw chords.

A chord is drawn from from the {% katex %}12th{% endkatex %} point around the circle to the {% katex %}24th{% endkatex %} point, since they are related under multiplication by {% katex %}2{% endkatex %}.

Similarly, a chord is drawn from the {% katex %}132nd{% endkatex %} point around the circle to the {% katex %}64th{% endkatex %} point, since {% katex %}2 \times 132 = 264 \equiv 64 \pmod{200}{% endkatex %}.

Once all chords are drawn, a clear envelope can be seen, forming the shape of a cardioid!

Try out different combinations of modulus and multiplier to see how the image changes.

{% include js_project_embed.html project_name='times_tables' %}

## Resources

#### Mathologer - Times Tables, Mandelbrot, and the Heart of Mathematics
The Mathologer presents a visual representation of times tables in modular arithmetic, and talks about some of the curious patterns that are generated by the chords, as well as other places in maths where these shapes are found.

{% include youtube_embed.html id='qhbuKbxJsk8' %}

#### Vihart - Doodling in Math Class: Connecting Dots
Vi Hart monologues about doodling envelopes of curves in math class, providing insights into the interrelatedness of cones, parabolas, ellipses, hyperbolas, catenaries, and cardioids.

{% include youtube_embed.html id='v-pyuaThp-c' %}
